JUDY WOODRUFF: Our lead
story tonight: James
Comey tells his story.
In a prepared statement
to the Senate Intelligence
Committee, released one
day ahead of his hearing
tomorrow, the former
FBI director details his
personal conversations
with the president,
nine in total, compared
with just two during three
years with President Obama.
Comey describes how Mr. Trump
asked repeatedly for a pledge
of personal loyalty, asked that
he drop the investigation
into General Michael
Flynn, and complained that
allegations surrounding
Russia were a cloud
over his presidency.
Comey also confirms that he told
President Trump that he wasn't
under investigation himself.
Moments ago, Mr. Trump's
attorney responded in
a written statement,
quoting, "The president
is pleased," it says, "that
Mr. Comey has finally publicly
confirmed his private reports
that the president wasn't
under investigation
in any Russia probe."
And continuing, he wrote, "The
president feels completely
and totally vindicated."
Now, there is a
lot to unpack here.
We're going to walk through
much of it now with reporter
Matt Apuzzo of The New York
Times and with John Carlin.
He served as assistant attorney
general for national security
from 2014 until October
of last year.
He's now an attorney
in private practice.
And let's start with their
first meeting on January 6
at Trump Tower in New York.
And, Matt, and -- we're going
-- I'm going to ask both of
you right now about this.
To set a little background,
it was New York City.
James Comey was meeting the
president for the first time.
He showed up at Trump Tower
to meet the president's
national security team,
and then, privately,
he and the president-elect then
had a one-on-one session where
Comey shared with Mr. Trump
information -- he called
it sensitive information
of a salacious nature
that had been gathered
as part of the
Russia investigation.
So, with that background,
here is what James
Comey goes on to say.
They had a meeting.
Here are some specifics now,
beginning with a dinner at the
White House three weeks later
now.
Now, this is January 27,
after Mr. Trump is president.
On that day, the president
invited Comey over.
They dined alone
in the Green Room.
And here's how
Comey describes its.
He says: "My instincts told me
that the one-on-one setting, and
the pretense that this was our
first discussion about my
position, meant the dinner was,
at least in part, an effort
to have me ask for my job
and create some sort of
patronage relationship.
That concerned me
greatly, given the FBI's
traditionally independent
status in the executive
branch.
I replied that I loved my work
and intended to stay and serve
out my 10-year term as director.
"And then, because the set-up
made me uneasy, I added that I
was not 'reliable' in the way
politicians use that word,
but he could always count
on me to tell him the truth.
A few moments later, the
president said, 'I need
loyalty, I expect loyalty.'
I didn't move, speak, or change
my facial expression in any
way during the awkward silence
that followed.
We simply looked at
each other in silence."
Matt Apuzzo, how does
this square with the
reporting you have done?
MATT APUZZO, The New York Times:
Well, a lot of the -- a lot of
the details here, my colleagues
and I have been reporting
out here over the
last several weeks.
But it's hard to overstate just
the extraordinary nature of
the portrait we're seeing here.
We're really getting -- we're
really getting the backstory
to the Jim Comey firing.
We're seeing a president who
was preoccupied with, as you
said, getting the cloud lifted,
the cloud of this Russia
investigation that was -- become
a real liability for the Trump
administration from day one.
And the idea that at
this private dinner that
the president starts
their relationship by
asking for this loyalty pledge,
you can -- you just read these
memos, you can see Comey,
just his anxiety
here in the words.
It just the uncomfortable
-- you know, the discomfort
he has is palpable.
And you can see Trump getting
more and more frustrated that,
you know, why is this guy
not doing what I'm asking?
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Carlin, from
your perspective, what is the
significance of this exchange
of the president
asking for loyalty?
JOHN CARLIN, Former Justice
Department Official:
Well, the FBI has a
unique institutional role,
as does the
Department of Justice.
And so, because both the FBI and
prosecutors in the Department
of Justice may be called
upon to investigate potential
criminal activity by members of
the president's party, by actual
members of the
administration, and in some
circumstances investigate
conduct of a president
him or herself, there's been
a history where the department
has attempted to shield itself
from political interference.
And there have been times in
that history where maintaining
that independence has been
particularly fraught.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
JOHN CARLIN: In my tenure as
chief of staff at the FBI, and
in my time at the department,
I can't recall something
quite like this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, and I just
want to pick up on that, later
on in that January 27 dinner,
alone with the president
in the White House in the
green room, Mr. Comey writes.
He says: "He then
said, 'I need loyalty.'
I replied, 'You will always
get honesty from me.'
He paused and then said, 'That's
what I want, honest loyalty.'
I paused, and then said,
'You will get that from me.'"
Is that something, John
Carlin, that was appropriate?
JOHN CARLIN: Well, you can
see how the president's
demanding loyalty, that
might be appropriate
in some other context
of a political campaign,
or even other parts
of the administration.
But Director Comey is very
focused, it look likes in that
exchange, and understands the
unique independence of the
role of the FBI director.
And the reason why the statute
was changed so that the FBI
director's term of years is
10 years designed to cut across
administrations to ensure that
the president who appointed
the director, that the
director would outlast the
tenure of that president.
And so Director Comey, I
think, is trying to explain
in this awkward context why he
will be honest, not disloyal in
some sense, but loyal ultimately
to the Constitution and
the country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, now I want
to turn both of you to this
-- I think it was their next
meeting, February the 14th, in
a meeting in the Oval Office.
Now, this time it was with
the president, the vice
president, the attorney general,
several other senior
administration officials.
At the end of that meeting,
the president asked everyone
to leave, except for Comey.
And according to Mr. Comey's
statement, Mr. Trump turned
back to the subject of General
Michael Flynn, who had been
fired just the day before, and
he said -- quote -- "'I hope
you can see your way
clear to letting this
go, to letting Flynn go.
He is a good guy.
I hope you can let this go.'"
And Comey writes: "I replied
only that 'he is a good guy.'
I did not say I
would 'let this go.'"
Matt Apuzzo, how does
that square with what
you have reported?
MATT APUZZO: My colleague
Michael Schmidt broke that
exchange a few weeks ago.
But it's no less -- it's no
less remarkable seeing it in
that full context, seeing the
president ask everybody to
leave the Oval Office and speak
alone with the head of the
FBI and say, you
know, let Flynn go.
Just the very nature of we --
people -- we don't have to be
in Washington to understand
why that makes us
feel uncomfortable.
I mean, anybody who has ever
fought a ticket in court, you
know, knows that they don't
- - they don't want to feel
like the criminal justice system
is rigged for people who are
friendly with the politicians.
And so if you're at the
FBI, yes, you are part
of the administration.
You're part of the
Department of Justice.
But they just don't see
themselves as working
for the president when
it comes to criminal
justice stuff, and, as John
said, certainly not when the
investigation touches on the
president's own associates.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, continuing
that now, this is afterward,
the same day, February 14.
Comey writes he spoke with the
attorney general in person.
He said: "I took the opportunity
to implore the attorney
general to prevent any future
direct communication between
me and the president - -
between the president and me.
I told the A.G. what had just
happened -- him being asked to
leave" -- because the attorney
general was one of those who
had been asked the leave the
Oval Office -- "while the FBI
director, who reports to
the A.G., remained behind."
He said: "That was inappropriate
and should never happen.
He did not reply."
John Carlin, how
do we read this?
JOHN CARLIN: I will tell
you, there have been
instances before, let's
say, in a terrorism
incident or a major shooting, in
my experience, where the White
House would sometimes reach
out directly to the FBI.
And it raised concerns, even
when that was the context, and
there were usual media calls
over to the attorney general to
ensure that the department was
aware of the contact directly
with the White House
or with immediate
aides to the president.
But to have the president of
the United States order people
out of the room in order -- you
know, if true, according to this
account -- in order to implore
the director of the FBI to
drop an investigation of
a friend or associate,
that's the core of why
many of our rules and
customs were in place, was to
prevent exactly that type of
conversation or interference
from occurring.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So now, here we
are, a month-and-a-half later.
This is March the 30th.
The president phones
Jim Comey at the FBI.
He repeats the idea of a cloud
over his administration because
of the Russia investigation.
He said: "He said he had
nothing to do with Russia, had
not been involved with hookers
in Russia, and had always
assumed he was being
recorded when in Russia.
He asked what we could
do to 'lift the cloud.'"
So, Matt Apuzzo, we're
back to that same scenario,
back and forth, where
the president is asking
the FBI director
to do something.
MATT APUZZO: Yes.
I mean, look, you can see
why Donald Trump might
be frustrated, right?
Just setting aside the fact
that he's the president, if
you have been told you are not
under investigation personally,
but yet your administration
can't escape the cloud of this
investigation, and you kind
of just want it to be over,
you can see why you would say,
hey, what do I have to
do to make this go away?
If I'm not under investigation,
why can't you just say that?
That's a very human response.
But, as John said, there's
a reason, and there's
a process that you're
supposed to go through
when you reach out
on stuff like this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, and just
finally, John, we're not showing
anymore graphics from the
statement, but it was
on March the 30th.
There was another
phone call where the
president again called,
complaining about the cloud
over his presidency.
And in that conversation,
he said: "If there were some
satellite associates of his who
did something wrong, it would
be good to find that out, but
that he hadn't done anything
wrong and hoped I would find
a way to get it out there."
And then he called Mr. Comey
again on April the 11th, and
talked about loyalty, back and
forth.
He said, "I have been very
loyal to you," and, in essence,
saying, will you be loyal
back to me?
And he said, "At this
point, I didn't answer him."
And you also, today, finally
now, John Carlin, have
the president's attorney
saying the president
feels vindicated.
JOHN CARLIN: Well, I think
in those conversations and
in that back-and-forth,
you also had Director
Comey informing the president,
according to this opening
statement, that he had recounted
their previous conversation
to the then-acting deputy
attorney general, Dana Boente.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
JOHN CARLIN: And when
the president called, I
think, the second time,
the president referenced
and said, should I reach out?
And it sounds like Director
Comey tried to say yes,
you should, through
White House counsel.
And the idea of making a --
potentially making public the
results of an investigation, the
appropriate channel, the one
that's set up, there's actually
a memorandum on White House
contacts that's designed to
ensure that that type of contact
takes place lawyer to lawyer,
White House counsel to
deputy attorney general,
to avoid either the
actuality of interference
with an investigation
or the appearance.
And you can see this kind
of confused back-and-forth.
To me, the most troubling of
the exchanges that are detailed
-- and the rest do provide
context for it -- would
be the direct request
to end an investigation
of an associate, if
true, related to the
investigation of Flynn.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Matt Apuzzo,
just finally, very quickly,
the fact that Director Comey
made these notes immediately
after each one of these meetings
or phone calls, I think,
adds to the remarkable
nature of all this.
MATT APUZZO: That's right.
I mean, you have a you have an
FBI director who clearly was
so uncomfortable with these
interactions, he felt like
he had to document them,
and not just document them.
I mean, it's like, this is where
he was sitting and this is where
he was sitting, and I walked
out the door near the
grandfather clock, and
then, halfway through,
this guy knocked on
the door.
I mean, it is really detailed
stuff that is clearly intended
for future consultation and
to say, this isn't
just my memory.
I sat down and did
this in real time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we should
point out once again the
president's attorney has issued
a statement today saying the
president feels vindicated,
that, he, in essence, thanked
James Comey for repeating
the fact, he said, that
the president himself
wasn't under investigation.
So this will clearly continue.
We're going to hear from
Mr. Comey tomorrow himself.
John Carlin, Matt Apuzzo,
thank you very much.
JOHN CARLIN: Thank you.
MATT APUZZO: Thank you.